Symfony Authentication (#27)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2019-09-24-how-to-create-a-symfony-app-with-authentication.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: How to Create a Simple Symfony Application with Authentication

> description: "In this post we'll create a simple Symfony application and add user authentication with Okta"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create a simple Symfony application and add user authentication with Okta."
```

- "Add authentication to your Symfony project quickly using Okta! 🎉"
image: blog/featured/okta-php-headphones.jpg
---

Symfony is not the most popular or loved PHP framework, but it's arguably the most mature, flexible, and reliable. Since its initial release, Symfony has evolved into a set of loosely-coupled, high-quality components that can be chosen individually or combined to create powerful applications, without the compromise of bloat or huge runtime overhead. These components are also widely used outside the context of the framework, as stand-alone modules or sitting at the bottom of other frameworks (e.g., Laravel) and content management systems (Drupal).

One of the most common features of Web applications is user authentication/authorization. Symfony provides a powerful Security component that can take care of most user management use cases automatically. However, you can quickly expand it to add additional authentication methods and user providers, so you don't have to maintain your own Identity Provider (IdP). In this article, I'll show you how to implement user authentication using Okta as the IdP within the Symfony 4.3 security module.

> To follow this tutorial, you'll need PHP, MySQL, Composer, and a free [Okta developer account](https://developer.okta.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow this tutorial, you'll need PHP, MySQL, Composer, and a free [Okta developer account](https://developer.okta.com/signup/).
```

Enter a title, and set `http://localhost:8000/` as the Base URI, and `http://localhost:8000/authorization-code/callback` as the Login Redirect URI, then click **Done**. You can leave the rest of the settings as they are.

Copy the Client ID and Client Secret from the application settings, you will need them soon.

## Set up the Symfony Project

Create a MySQL database and user:

```bash
mysql -uroot -p
CREATE DATABASE symfony_auth CHARACTER SET utf8mb4 COLLATE utf8mb4_unicode_ci;
GRANT ALL on symfony_auth.* to 'symfony_auth'@'127.0.0.1' identified by 'symfony_auth';
quit
```

Initialize a new Symfony project using the Flex skeleton and start the built-in PHP server:

```bash
composer create-project symfony/skeleton symfony-auth-demo
cd symfony-auth-demo
php -S 127.0.0.1:8000 -t public
```

Load `http://127.0.0.1:8000` and you should see the default Symfony page.

Make sure the version of Symfony is locked to 4.3 in `composer.json` by confirming the versions match the below:

```
...
        "symfony/console": "4.3.*",
        "symfony/dotenv": "4.3.*",
        "symfony/flex": "^1.3.1",
        "symfony/framework-bundle": "4.3.*",
        "symfony/yaml": "4.3.*"

> ...

Reviewer: I typically left-align code blocks, but I'll leave this up to you.

Author: I'll leave this since it matches the indentation of the file in case someone copypastes it.

```

Update the dependencies if you made any changes to `composer.json`:

```bash
composer update
```

Create a new `.env.local` file inside the main project directory to store your local credentials and add the following values:

`.env.local`

```
DATABASE_URL=mysql://symfony_auth:symfony_auth@127.0.0.1:3306/symfony_auth
OKTA_BASE_URL=http://localhost:8000/
OKTA_REDIRECT_URI=http://localhost:8000/authorization-code/callback
OKTA_CLIENT_ID=
OKTA_CLIENT_SECRET=

> OKTA_METADATA_URL=https://{{yourOktaDomain}}/oauth2/default/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server

Reviewer: Change {{yourOktaDomain}} to {yourOktaDomain}, or wrap the code block with raw tags.

```

Replace the domain name in `OKTA_METADATA_URL` with your own (`dev-xxxxxx.okta.com`), and input your Client ID and Client Secret (saved when you created the Okta application).

## Create a Basic Symfony Controller and Home Page Template

In this section, you'll create your first Symfony controller and a simple home page template. Since you started with Symfony Flex and just the skeleton, add the Framework Extra bundle (so you can use the Doctrine ORM and Annotations) and the templating engine (Twig) bundle:

```bash
composer require sensio/framework-extra-bundle symfony/twig-bundle
```

Replace `templates/base.html.twig`:

> {%raw%}

Reviewer: Raw tags are only needed for double curlies: {{ }}

Author: That's not what I saw. Without the raw tag I get this error here:

> Liquid Exception: Liquid syntax error (line 115): Unknown tag 'block'

 > User
 created: src/Entity/User.php
 created: src/Repository/UserRepository.php

 Entity generated! Now let's add some fields!

 You can always add more fields later manually or by re-running this command.
 New property name (press <return> to stop adding fields):
 > name

 Field type (enter ? to see all types) [string]:
 >

 Field length [255]:
 >

 Can this field be null in the database (nullable) (yes/no) [no]:
 >

 updated: src/Entity/User.php
 Add another property? Enter the property name (or press <return> to stop adding fields):
 > email

 Field type (enter ? to see all types) [string]:
 >

 Field length [255]:
 > 191

 Can this field be null in the database (nullable) (yes/no) [no]:
 >

 updated: src/Entity/User.php
 Add another property? Enter the property name (or press <return> to stop adding fields):
 > token

 Field type (enter ? to see all types) [string]:
 > text
 
 Can this field be null in the database (nullable) (yes/no) [no]:
 >

 updated: src/Entity/User.php
 Add another property? Enter the property name (or press <return> to stop adding fields):
 >

Success!

Next: When you're ready, create a migration with make:migration
```

> Next, let's make modifications to the User entity: set the email field to be unique, implement the `UserInterface`, and make it serializable. Here's the full version for clarity:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let's make modifications to the `User` entity: set the email field to be unique, implement the `UserInterface`, and make it serializable. Here's the full version for clarity:
```

        ]);
        return $url;
    }

    public function authorizeUser()
    {
        if ($this->session->get('state') != $_GET['state']) {
            return null;
        }

        if (isset($_GET['error'])) {
            return null;
        }

        $metadata = $this->httpRequest($this->metadataUrl);

        $response = $this->httpRequest($metadata->token_endpoint, [
            'grant_type' => 'authorization_code',
            'code' => $_GET['code'],
            'redirect_uri' => $this->redirectUri,
            'client_id' => $this->clientId,
            'client_secret' => $this->clientSecret
        ]);

        if (!isset($response->id_token)) {
            return null;
        }

        $this->session->set('id_token', $response->id_token);

        $claims = json_decode(base64_decode(explode('.', $response->id_token)[1]));

        return $claims;
    }

    private function httpRequest($url, $params = null)
    {
        $ch = curl_init($url);
        curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_RETURNTRANSFER, true);
        if ($params) {
            curl_setopt($ch, CURLOPT_POSTFIELDS, http_build_query($params));
        }
        return json_decode(curl_exec($ch));
    }
}
```

> Quite a few things happen inside this service. This service initiates the authentication flow and redirects the user to Okta, and confirms their user info when Okta redirects back to the app. If you want to understand it better, check this article: [Build Simple Login in PHP](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2018/12/28/simple-login-php)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quite a few things happen inside this service. This service initiates the authentication flow and redirects the user to Okta, and confirms their user info when Okta redirects back to the app. If you want to understand it better, check this article: [Build Simple Login in PHP](/blog/2018/12/28/simple-login-php).
```

            return $this->redirectToRoute('home');
        }

        $email = $token->email;
        $user = $this->userRepository->findOneByEmail($email);

        if (! $user) {
            $user = new User();
            $user->setEmail($email);
            $user->setName($email);
            $user->setToken($accessToken);
            $em = $this->getDoctrine()->getManager();
            $em->persist($user);
            $em->flush();
        }

        // Manually authenticate the user
        $token = new UsernamePasswordToken($user, null, 'main', $user->getRoles());
        $this->get('security.token_storage')->setToken($token);
        $this->get('session')->set('_security_main', serialize($token));

        return $this->redirectToRoute('home');
    }

    /**
    * @Route("/logout", name="logout")
    */
    public function logout()
    {

    }
}
```

Clicking the login button now takes you to the Okta login form, or immediately logs you in if you're already logged into Okta. Once you're logged in, you can access the Personal Home Page link and you can also see your Okta email displayed as your login identifier.

## Learn More About Symfony, Authentication, and Okta

> You can find the whole code example [on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-php-symfony-auth). 

Reviewer: Repos are commonly suffixed with `-example`. Also, there's a typo in the README: 

> Symfony project usokg Okta.
